Add documentation for rule-based anomaly detection and imputation (#8202)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _observing-your-data/ad/index.md

Anomaly detection automatically detects anomalies in your OpenSearch data in near real-time using the Random Cut Forest (RCF) algorithm. RCF is an unsupervised machine learning algorithm that models a sketch of your incoming data stream to compute an `anomaly grade` and `confidence score` value for each incoming data point. These values are used to differentiate an anomaly from normal variations. For more information about how RCF works, see [Random Cut Forests](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Robust-Random-Cut-Forest-Based-Anomaly-Detection-on-Guha-Mishra/ecb365ef9b67cd5540cc4c53035a6a7bd88678f9).

You can pair the Anomaly Detection plugin with the [Alerting plugin]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/monitoring-plugins/alerting/) to notify you as soon as an anomaly is detected.

## Using OpenSearch Dashboards anomaly detection

To get started, go to **OpenSearch Dashboards** > **OpenSearch Plugins** > **Anomaly Detection**. OpenSearch Dashboards contains sample datasets. You can use these datasets with their preconfigured detectors to try out the feature.

The following tutorial guides you through using anomaly detection with your OpenSearch data.

## Step 1: Define a detector

> A _detector_ is an individual anomaly detection task. You can define multiple detectors. All the detectors can run simultaneously, with each analyzing data from different sources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A _detector_ is an individual anomaly detection task. You can define multiple detectors, and all detectors can run simultaneously, with each analyzing data from different sources.
```

1. Choose **Create detector**.
1. Add the detector details.

>    - Enter a name and brief description. Make sure the name is unique and descriptive enough to help you to identify the detector's purpose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Enter a name that describes the detector's intended use.
```

For example, if you choose `min()`, the detector focuses on finding anomalies based on the minimum values of your feature. If you choose `average()`, the detector finds anomalies based on the average values of your feature.

A multi-feature model correlates anomalies across all its features. The [curse of dimensionality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curse_of_dimensionality) makes it less likely for multi-feature models to identify smaller anomalies as compared to a single-feature model. Adding more features can negatively impact the [precision and recall](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Precision_and_recall) of a model. A higher proportion of noise in your data can further amplify this negative impact. Selecting the optimal feature set is usually an iterative process. By default, the maximum number of features for a detector is `5`. You can adjust this limit with the `plugins.anomaly_detection.max_anomaly_features` setting.
{: .note}

### Configuring a model based on an aggregation method

To configure an anomaly detection model based on an aggregation method, follow these steps:

1. On the **Detectors** page, select the desired detector from the listed options.

> 2. On the detector's details page,  select the **Actions** button to activate the dropdown menu and then select **Edit model configuration**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. On the detector's details page, select the **Actions** button to activate the dropdown menu and then select **Edit model configuration**.
```

4. Enter a name in the **Feature name** field and select the **Enable feature** checkbox.
5. Select **Field value** from the dropdown menu under **Find anomalies based on**.
6. Select the desired aggregation from the dropdown menu under **Aggregation method**.
7. Select the desired field from the available options listed in the dropdown menu under **Field**.
8. Select the **Save changes** button.

### Configuring a model based on a JSON aggregation query

To configure an anomaly detection model based on a JSON aggregation query, follow these steps:

1. On the **Edit model configuration** page, select the **Add another feature** button. 
2. Enter a name in the **Feature name** field and select the **Enable feature** checkbox.
3. Select **Custom expression** from the dropdown menu under **Find anomalies based on**. The JSON editor window will open.
4. Enter your JSON aggregation query in the editor.
5. Select the **Save changes** button.

For acceptable JSON query syntax, see [OpenSearch Query DSL]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/opensearch/query-dsl/index/)
{: .note}

### Setting category fields for high cardinality

> You can categorize anomalies based on a keyword or IP field type. The category field categorizes or slices the source time series with a dimension, such as IP addresses, product IDs, and country codes. This gives you a granular view of anomalies within each entity of the category field to help isolate and debug issues.

Reviewer: Revised. Also revised UI te
<img width="1398" alt="Screenshot 2024-09-13 at 11 12 07 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2d5cd846-1e39-4791-bcd2-c7e18e411691">
rms based on 2.17 release candidate interface.

### Setting an imputation option

On the **Advanced settings** pane, you can set the imputation option. This allows you to handle missing data in your streams. The options include the following:

- **Ignore Missing Data (Default):** The system continues without considering missing data points, keeping the existing data flow.
- **Fill with Custom Values:** Specify a custom value for each feature to replace missing data points, allowing for targeted imputation tailored to your data.
- **Fill with Zeros:** Replace missing values with zeros. This is ideal when the absence of data indicates a significant event, such as a drop to zero in event counts.
- **Use Previous Values:** Fill gaps with the last observed value to maintain continuity in your time-series data. This method treats missing data as non-anomalous, carrying forward the previous trend.

Using these options can improve recall in anomaly detection. For instance, if you are monitoring for drops in event counts, including both partial and complete drops, then filling missing values with zeros helps detect significant data absences, improving detection recall.

> Be cautious when imputing extensively missing data, as excessive gaps can compromise model accuracy. Quality input is critical---poor data quality leads to poor model performance. You can check whether a feature value has been imputed using the `feature_imputed` field in the anomaly result index. See [Anomaly result mapping]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/monitoring-plugins/ad/result-mapping) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be cautious when imputing extensively missing data, as excessive gaps can compromise model accuracy. Quality input is critical---poor data quality leads to poor model performance. You can check whether a feature value has been imputed using the `feature_imputed` field in the anomaly result index. See [Anomaly result mapping]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/monitoring-plugins/ad/result-mapping/) for more information.
```

## Step 4: Reviewing detector settings 

Review your detector settings and model configurations to confirm they are valid and then select **Create detector**.

If validation errors occur, then edit the settings to fix the error and return to the detector page.
{: .note }

## Step 5: Observing the results

Choose the **Real-time results** or **Historical analysis** tab. For real-time results, it will take time to display the anomaly results. For example, if the detector interval is 10 minutes, then the detector may take an hour to start because it is waiting for sufficient data to generate anomalies. 

A shorter interval means the model passes the shingle process more quickly and starts to generate the anomaly results sooner. You can use the [profile detector]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/monitoring-plugins/ad/api#profile-detector) operation to ensure you have enough data points.

If the detector is pending in "initialization" for longer than a day, aggregate your existing data using the detector interval to check for any missing data points. If you find many missing data points from the aggregated data, consider increasing the detector interval.

> Choose and drag over the anomaly line chart to zoom in and see a detailed view of an anomaly.

Reviewer 2: Is this an instance where "Click" would actually be preferable to "Choose"?

{: .note }

> You can analyze anomalies with the following visualizations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can analyze anomalies using the following visualizations:
```

### Setting an imputation option

In the **Advanced settings** pane, you can set the imputation option. This allows you to manage missing data in your streams. The options include the following:

- **Ignore Missing Data (Default):** The system continues without considering missing data points, keeping the existing data flow.
- **Fill with Custom Values:** Specify a custom value for each feature to replace missing data points, allowing for targeted imputation tailored to your data.
- **Fill with Zeros:** Replace missing values with zeros. This is ideal when the absence of data indicates a significant event, such as a drop to zero in event counts.
- **Use Previous Values:** Fill gaps with the last observed value to maintain continuity in your time-series data. This method treats missing data as non-anomalous, carrying forward the previous trend.

Using these options can improve recall in anomaly detection. For instance, if you are monitoring for drops in event counts, including both partial and complete drops, then filling missing values with zeros helps detect significant data absences, improving detection recall.

> Be cautious when imputing extensively missing data, as excessive gaps can compromise model accuracy. Quality input is critical---poor data quality leads to poor model performance. You can check whether a feature value has been imputed using the `feature_imputed` field in the anomaly results index. See [Anomaly result mapping]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/monitoring-plugins/ad/result-mapping/) for more information.

Author: Can you also add "The confidence score decreases when imputations occur."? So there are two signals from imputation: feature_imputed field and confidence score.

> Be cautious when imputing extensively missing data, as excessive gaps can compromise model accuracy. Quality input is critical---poor data quality leads to poor model performance. You can check whether a feature value has been imputed using the `feature_imputed` field in the anomaly results index. See [Anomaly result mapping]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/monitoring-plugins/ad/result-mapping/) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be cautious when imputing extensively missing data, as excessive gaps can compromise model accuracy. Quality input is critical---poor data quality leads to poor model performance. The confidence score also decreases when imputations occur. You can check whether a feature value has been imputed using the `feature_imputed` field in the anomaly results index. See [Anomaly result mapping]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/monitoring-plugins/ad/result-mapping/) for more information.
```

For example, if you choose `min()`, the detector focuses on finding anomalies based on the minimum values of your feature. If you choose `average()`, the detector finds anomalies based on the average values of your feature.

A multi-feature model correlates anomalies across all its features. The [curse of dimensionality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curse_of_dimensionality) makes it less likely for multi-feature models to identify smaller anomalies as compared to a single-feature model. Adding more features might negatively impact the [precision and recall](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Precision_and_recall) of a model. A higher proportion of noise in your data might further amplify this negative impact. Selecting the optimal feature set is usually an iterative process. By default, the maximum number of features for a detector is 5. You can adjust this limit with the `plugins.anomaly_detection.max_anomaly_features` setting.
{: .note}

To configure an anomaly detection model based on an aggregation method, follow these steps:

> 1. On the **Configure model** page, enter the **Feature name** and select the **Enable feature** checkbox.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. On the **Detectors** page, select the desired detector and then select the **Actions** button to activate the dropdown menu.
2. From the dropdown menu, select **Edit model configuration**.
3. On the **Edit model configuration** page, select the **Add another feature** button. 
4. Enter a name in the **Feature name** and select the **Enable feature** checkbox.
5. Select the **Save changes** button.
```

> 1. For **Find anomalies based on**, select **Field Value**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. For **Find anomalies based on**, select **Field Value**.
```

{: .note}

To configure an anomaly detection model based on an aggregation method, follow these steps:

1. On the **Detectors** page, select the desired detector and then select the **Actions** button to activate the dropdown menu.
2. From the dropdown menu, select **Edit model configuration**.
3. On the **Edit model configuration** page, select the **Add another feature** button. 
4. Enter a name in the **Feature name** and select the **Enable feature** checkbox.
5. For **Find anomalies based on**, select **Field Value**.

> 1. For **aggregation method**, select either **average()**, **count()**, **sum()**, **min()**, or **max()**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. For **aggregation method**, select either **average()**, **count()**, **sum()**, **min()**, or **max()**.
```

> 1. For **Field**, select from the available options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. For **Field**, select from the available options.
8. Select the **Save changes** button.
```

For example, if you choose `min()`, the detector focuses on finding anomalies based on the minimum values of your feature. If you choose `average()`, the detector finds anomalies based on the average values of your feature.

A multi-feature model correlates anomalies across all its features. The [curse of dimensionality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curse_of_dimensionality) makes it less likely for multi-feature models to identify smaller anomalies as compared to a single-feature model. Adding more features might negatively impact the [precision and recall](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Precision_and_recall) of a model. A higher proportion of noise in your data might further amplify this negative impact. Selecting the optimal feature set is usually an iterative process. By default, the maximum number of features for a detector is 5. You can adjust this limit with the `plugins.anomaly_detection.max_anomaly_features` setting.
{: .note}

To configure an anomaly detection model based on an aggregation method, follow these steps:

> 1. On the **Detectors** page, select the desired detector and then select the **Actions** button to activate the dropdown menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. On the **Detectors** page, select the desired detector from the listed options.
2. One the detector's details page,  select the **Actions** button to activate the dropdown menu and then select **Edit model configuration**.
```

2. From the dropdown menu, select **Edit model configuration**.
3. On the **Edit model configuration** page, select the **Add another feature** button. 

> 4. Enter a name in the **Feature name** and select the **Enable feature** checkbox.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Enter a name in the **Feature name** field and select the **Enable feature** checkbox.
```

> 5. For **Find anomalies based on**, select **Field Value**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Select **Field value** from the dropdown menu under **Find anomalies based on**.
```

> 6. For **Aggregation method**, select the desired method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. For **Aggregation method**, select the desired aggregation from the dropdown menu.
```

> 6. For **aggregation method**, select either **average()**, **count()**, **sum()**, **min()**, or **max()**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. For **Aggregation method**, select the desired method.
```

> 6. For **Aggregation method**, select the desired aggregation from the dropdown menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Select the desired aggregation from the dropdown menu under **Aggregation method**.
```

> 7. For **Field**, select from the available options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Select the desired field from the available options in the dropdown menu under **Field**.
```

> 7. Select the desired field from the available options in the dropdown menu under **Field**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Select the desired field from the available options listed in the dropdown menu under **Field**.
```

8. Select the **Save changes** button.

To configure an anomaly detection model based on a JSON aggregation query, follow these steps:

> 1. On the **Configure Model** page, enter the **Feature name** and select the **Enable feature** checkbox.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. On the **Edit model configuration** page, select the **Add another feature** button. 
2. Enter a name in the **Feature name** field and select the **Enable feature** checkbox..
```

For example, if you choose `min()`, the detector focuses on finding anomalies based on the minimum values of your feature. If you choose `average()`, the detector finds anomalies based on the average values of your feature.

A multi-feature model correlates anomalies across all its features. The [curse of dimensionality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curse_of_dimensionality) makes it less likely for multi-feature models to identify smaller anomalies as compared to a single-feature model. Adding more features might negatively impact the [precision and recall](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Precision_and_recall) of a model. A higher proportion of noise in your data might further amplify this negative impact. Selecting the optimal feature set is usually an iterative process. By default, the maximum number of features for a detector is 5. You can adjust this limit with the `plugins.anomaly_detection.max_anomaly_features` setting.
{: .note}

> To configure an anomaly detection model based on an aggregation method, follow these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configuring a model based on an aggregation method

To configure an anomaly detection model based on an aggregation method, follow these steps:
```

1. On the **Detectors** page, select the desired detector from the listed options.

> 2. One the detector's details page,  select the **Actions** button to activate the dropdown menu and then select **Edit model configuration**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. On the detector's details page,  select the **Actions** button to activate the dropdown menu and then select **Edit model configuration**.
```

> 2. From the dropdown menu, select **Edit model configuration**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

4. Enter a name in the **Feature name** field and select the **Enable feature** checkbox.
5. Select **Field value** from the dropdown menu under **Find anomalies based on**.
6. Select the desired aggregation from the dropdown menu under **Aggregation method**.
7. Select the desired field from the available options listed in the dropdown menu under **Field**.
8. Select the **Save changes** button.

To configure an anomaly detection model based on a JSON aggregation query, follow these steps:

1. On the **Edit model configuration** page, select the **Add another feature** button. 

> 2. Enter a name in the **Feature name** field and select the **Enable feature** checkbox..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Enter a name in the **Feature name** field and select the **Enable feature** checkbox.
```

> 1. For **Find anomalies based on**, select **Custom expression**. The JSON editor window will open.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Select **Custom expression** from the dropdown menu under **Find anomalies based on**. The JSON editor window will open.
```

{: .note}

### Configuring a model based on an aggregation method

To configure an anomaly detection model based on an aggregation method, follow these steps:

1. On the **Detectors** page, select the desired detector from the listed options.
2. On the detector's details page,  select the **Actions** button to activate the dropdown menu and then select **Edit model configuration**.
3. On the **Edit model configuration** page, select the **Add another feature** button. 
4. Enter a name in the **Feature name** field and select the **Enable feature** checkbox.
5. Select **Field value** from the dropdown menu under **Find anomalies based on**.
6. Select the desired aggregation from the dropdown menu under **Aggregation method**.
7. Select the desired field from the available options listed in the dropdown menu under **Field**.
8. Select the **Save changes** button.

> To configure an anomaly detection model based on a JSON aggregation query, follow these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configuring a model based on a JSON aggregation query

To configure an anomaly detection model based on a JSON aggregation query, follow these steps:
```

Set the number of aggregation intervals from your data stream to consider in a detection window. It’s best to choose this value based on your actual data to see which one leads to the best results for your use case.

The anomaly detector expects the shingle size to be in the range of 1 and 128. The default shingle size is 8. We recommend that you don't choose 1 unless you have two or more features. Smaller values might increase [recall](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Precision_and_recall) but also false positives. Larger values might be useful for ignoring noise in a signal.

> 

Reviewer: @kaituo What constitutes large values? We need to be specific.

Author: I meant smaller than 8 or larger than 8.

This formula serves as a starting point. Make sure to test it with a representative workload. You can find more information in the [Improving Anomaly Detection: One million entities in one minute](https://opensearch.org/blog/one-million-enitities-in-one-minute/) blog post.
{: .note }

### (Advanced settings) Set a shingle size

Set the number of aggregation intervals from your data stream to consider in a detection window. It’s best to choose this value based on your actual data to see which one leads to the best results for your use case.

> The anomaly detector expects the shingle size to be in the range of 1 and 128. The default shingle size is `8`. Choose `1` only if you have two or more features. Smaller values might increase [recall](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Precision_and_recall) but also increase false positives. Larger values might be useful for ignoring noise in a signal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The anomaly detector requires the shingle size to be between 1 and 128. The default is `8`. Use `1` only if you have at least two features. Values less than `8` may increase [recall](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Precision_and_recall), but also increase false positives. Values greater than `8` may be useful for ignoring noise in a signal.
```

This formula serves as a starting point. Make sure to test it with a representative workload. You can find more information in the [Improving Anomaly Detection: One million entities in one minute](https://opensearch.org/blog/one-million-enitities-in-one-minute/) blog post.
{: .note }

### (Advanced settings) Set a shingle size

Set the number of aggregation intervals from your data stream to consider in a detection window. It’s best to choose this value based on your actual data to see which one leads to the best results for your use case.

> The anomaly detector requires the shingle size to be between 1 and 128. The default is `8`. Use `1` only if you have at least two features. Values less than `8` may increase [recall](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Precision_and_recall), but also increase false positives. Values greater than `8` may be useful for ignoring noise in a signal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The anomaly detector requires the shingle size to be between 1 and 128. The default is `8`. Use `1` only if you have at least two features. Values less than `8` may increase [recall](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Precision_and_recall), but also increase false positives. Values greater than `8` may be useful for ignoring noise in a signal.

To set the shingle size, select **Show** on the **Advanced settings** pane. Enter the desired size in the **intervals** field.
```

Reviewer: "intervals" is intentionally lowercase, as that is the UI spelling.

This formula serves as a starting point. Make sure to test it with a representative workload. You can find more information in the [Improving Anomaly Detection: One million entities in one minute](https://opensearch.org/blog/one-million-enitities-in-one-minute/) blog post.
{: .note }

### (Advanced settings) Set a shingle size

Set the number of aggregation intervals from your data stream to consider in a detection window. It’s best to choose this value based on your actual data to see which one leads to the best results for your use case.

The anomaly detector requires the shingle size to be between 1 and 128. The default is `8`. Use `1` only if you have at least two features. Values less than `8` may increase [recall](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Precision_and_recall), but also increase false positives. Values greater than `8` may be useful for ignoring noise in a signal.

To set the shingle size, select **Show** on the **Advanced settings** pane. Enter the desired size in the **intervals** field.

> ### (Advanced settings) Set an imputation option

Reviewer: @kaituo Where does the user go in OpenSearch Dashboards to set this option?

Author: They can do it under Advanced settings section, same as shingle size above.

To suppress anomalies for deviations smaller than 30% from the expected value, you can set the following rules:

```
Ignore anomalies for feature logVolume when the actual value is no more than 30% above the expected value.
Ignore anomalies for feature logVolume when the actual value is no more than 30% below the expected value.
```

Ensure that a feature, for example, `logVolume`, is properly defined in your model. Suppression rules are tied to specific features.
{: .note}

If you expect that the log volume should differ by at least 10,000 from the expected value before being considered an anomaly, you can set absolute thresholds:

```
Ignore anomalies for feature logVolume when the actual value is no more than 10000 above the expected value.
Ignore anomalies for feature logVolume when the actual value is no more than 10000 below the expected value.
```

If no custom suppression rules are set, then the system defaults to a filter that ignores anomalies with deviations of less than 20% from the expected value for each enabled feature.

### Preview sample anomalies

> Preview sample anomalies and adjust the feature settings if needed.

Reviewer: @kaituo IS the user supposed to use OpenSearch Dashboards to preview the sample anomalies?

Author: They can use both Dashboards and command line to preview sample anomalies. But Dashboards are recommended.
